docs(rfc-0017): use map-based gRPC attributes (#168)
Kuadrant/architecture: rfcs/0017-grpcroute-support.md

| `request.url_path` | `/api/users/123` | `/package.Service/Method` |
| `request.headers` | Standard headers | HTTP/2 headers + gRPC metadata |
| `request.protocol` | `HTTP/1.1` or `HTTP/2` | `HTTP/2` |

> | `grpc.hasValue()` | `false` | `true` |

Reviewer: Is `hasValue()` a standard CEL function?

What's the expected behaviour in the cases where `grpc` is not defined? Will users be required to check `has(grpc) && grpc.hasValue()`?

Author: > Is `hasValue()` a standard CEL function?

Yes, `hasValue()` is a standard CEL function from the `cel.OptionalTypes()` library ([docs](https://github.com/google/cel-go/blob/v0.23.2/cel/library.go#L213)).

> What's the expected behaviour in the cases where `grpc` is not defined? Will users be required to check `has(grpc) && grpc.hasValue()`?

When a variable is declared and bound in the activation context, it's always accessible - no `has(grpc)` check needed.

There was an issue with the example syntax is was using though, CEL requires `.value()` to access Optional contents:                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                  
  ```yaml                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
  grpc.hasValue() && grpc.value().service == 'UserService'
```

Author: Actually, I'm going to double check all this.

Author: `hasValue()` is actually an "Optional" CEL method and not a standard function from what i can tell. Even though both the GO and Rust impls support it,  I'm going to avoid using it here, instead resorting to a nil map value and the use of `has(request.grpc)`

Reviewer 2: Not that this matters really anymore, but:
>`hasValue()` is actually an "Optional" CEL method and not a standard function from what i can tell.

It is a standard, yet optional _syntax_ and [related functions](https://github.com/google/cel-go/blob/c9d70486a872fbfaf9c4cb383a005de56e499368/cel/env_test.go#L284-L304), but they are [part of the grammar](https://github.com/google/cel-go/blob/master/parser/gen/CEL.g4#L55). They can be disabled/enabled as per how a user would want to use these.

>CEL requires .value() to access Optional contents

No, you can just deref the value transparently, _should a value be there_, eg [here](https://playcel.undistro.io/?content=H4sIAAAAAAAAA6tWSk7NUbJSyi8oyczPS8zRy0%2FTqI5RSsvPj1GyUjCs1dQDMpV0lFISSxI98wpKS4BqY%2FKAArn5KalANkh3LQDyw5uZRQAAAA%3D%3D):

`optional.none().foo` would return `null`, so would `optional.none().foo.bar` and so forth

| `grpc.service` | Error (optional.none()) | `UserService` (from `/UserService/GetUser`) |

> | `grpc.method` | Error (optional.none()) | `GetUser` (from `/UserService/GetUser`) |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `grpc.service` | Error (`optional.none()`) | `UserService` (from `/UserService/GetUser`) |
| `grpc.method` | Error (`optional.none()`) | `GetUser` (from `/UserService/GetUser`) |
```
does this break the table formatting?

Author: table looks fine, think this is a stale review comment

The following well-known attributes improve UX for `when` clauses and rate limit counters:

- `grpc` — CEL Optional binding containing gRPC request metadata (only present for gRPC requests)
  - `grpc.service` — extracted from `request.url_path` (e.g., `UserService` from `/UserService/GetUser`)
  - `grpc.method` — extracted from `request.url_path` (e.g., `GetUser` from `/UserService/GetUser`)

**Implementation approach:**
- WASM shim detects gRPC requests via `content-type: application/grpc` header
- Path parsing extracts service and method components from `/Service/Method` format
- `grpc` binding is implemented as a CEL Optional type

> - For gRPC requests: `grpc` contains `optional.of(GrpcMetadata)`

Author: GrpcMetadata is no longer used in the doc afaik

The following well-known attributes improve UX for `when` clauses and rate limit counters:

- `request.grpc` — nested map containing gRPC request metadata, accessible via standard CEL `has()` macro
  - `request.grpc.service` — extracted from `request.url_path` (e.g., `UserService` from `/UserService/GetUser`)
  - `request.grpc.method` — extracted from `request.url_path` (e.g., `GetUser` from `/UserService/GetUser`)

**Implementation approach:**

> - WASM shim detects gRPC requests via `content-type: application/grpc` header AND successful parsing of `request.url_path` as `/Service/Method`

Reviewer: Should we include `&& request.protocol == "HTTP/2"` too? I'm not sure about the situation of GRPCRoute for gRPC-Web.

Author: Apparently gRPC-web can be HTTP/1.1 or HTTP/2 http https://github.com/grpc/grpc/blob/master/doc/PROTOCOL-WEB.md. So we could add it, but there is that. 
We could also ensure the http method is POST as well if you are trying to narrow down the scope of matches, but tbh it would be malformed anyway if it is actually gRPC so ....

Author: Will not check for protocol for now see https://github.com/Kuadrant/architecture/pull/168#pullrequestreview-4187180965

> - WASM shim detects gRPC requests via `content-type: application/grpc` header AND successful parsing of `request.url_path` as `/Service/Method`

Reviewer: We should probably include Authorino here:

OPTION 1:

```suggestion
- WASM shim and Authorino (independently) detect gRPC requests via `content-type: application/grpc` header AND successful parsing of `request.url_path` as `/Service/Method`
```

OPTION 2:

```suggestion
- WASM shim detects gRPC requests via `content-type: application/grpc` header AND successful parsing of `request.url_path` as `/Service/Method`
- WASM shim hints Authorino about the GRPC request, by specifying additional context metadata that Authorino will then use to enable support for `request.grpc`
```

Author: Updated as described in Option 1

| `request.grpc.service` | absent (CEL error if accessed) | `UserService` (from `/UserService/GetUser`) |
| `request.grpc.method`  | absent (CEL error if accessed) | `GetUser` (from `/UserService/GetUser`) |

**Benefits of map-based approach:**
- **Type safety**: Accessing `request.grpc.service` without checking `has(request.grpc)` is a CEL error
- **No empty string bugs**: Cannot accidentally match HTTP traffic with negation logic — the key is absent, not empty
- **Clear semantics**: `has(request.grpc)` explicitly indicates whether the request is gRPC
- **Standard CEL**: Uses the built-in `has()` macro; no CEL Optional packages required. While CEL Optional types (`hasValue()`, `value()`) are supported in the Rust CEL library, the map-based approach avoids the complexity of Optional type handling.
- **Fail-closed security**: Missing `has(request.grpc)` checks cause CEL evaluation errors at request time, preventing accidental policy bypasses. The absent key ensures policies fail explicitly rather than allowing unintended access.
- **Consistent with other attributes**: Follows the same namespacing pattern as `request.headers`, `request.path`, etc.

> **Best practice for all policies:** Always include `has(request.grpc)` checks even when targeting a specific GRPCRoute. While only gRPC traffic flows through GRPCRoute resources, including the check provides defensive coding and prevents errors if policies are later copied to Gateway targets or if routing behavior changes. Consistent use of `has()` makes policy intent explicit and improves maintainability.

Author: PR title and description have been updated

  Add GRPCRoute support to the testsuite framework and E2E tests mirroring existing HTTPRoute test patterns. Test coverage for gRPC well-known attributes is optional but recommended.

- [ ] **Task 10: wasm-shim & RFC 0002 - gRPC Well-Known Attributes** (no blockers - can be developed in parallel)
  Implement `grpc` as a CEL Optional binding containing `service` and `method` fields in the WASM shim for improved UX in policy conditions and rate limit counters. For gRPC requests, `grpc` contains `optional.of(metadata)` where metadata includes service and method; for HTTP requests, `grpc` contains `optional.none()`. Update RFC 0002 specification with gRPC well-known attributes documentation.

- [ ] **Task 11: authorino - gRPC Well-Known Attributes** (no blockers - can be developed in parallel)

>   Extract `grpc.service` and `grpc.method` from gRPC requests and add to authorization JSON for use in OPA policies, CEL authorization rules, and other evaluators. For gRPC requests, include a `grpc` object with `service` and `method` fields. For non-gRPC requests, the `grpc` field must be absent (not present in the JSON) to align with OPA's `has()` check semantics and avoid serializing unnecessary null values.

Reviewer: I believe `has()` is a CEL function. It's not a Rego's [built-in](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/policy-reference/builtins) AFAIK, although [`is_null`](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/policy-reference/builtins/types) exists in some environments not tested with Authorino.

Author: Yes `has()` is a CEL macro, not a Rego built-in. Updated the wording as suggested.
